without a doubt the most exciting
scientific observation of 2012 was
discovery of the new particle at the
CERN laboratory that could be the Higgs
boson
a particle named after physicist Peter
Higgs the Higgs field is thought to give
mass to fundamental subatomic particles
like the quarks and leptons that make up
ordinary matter the Higgs bosons are
Wiggles in the field like the bump you
see when you twitch a rope but how does
this field give mass to particles if
this sounds confusing to you you're not
alone in 1993 the British Science
Minister challenged physicists to invent
a simple way to understand all this
Higgs stuff the prize was a bottle of
quality champagne the winning
explanation went something like this
suppose there is a large cocktail party
at the CERN laboratory filled with
particle physics researchers this crowd
of physicists represents the Higgs field
if a tax-collector entered the party
nobody would want to talk to them and
they could very easily cross the room to
get to the bar the tax collector
wouldn't interact with a crowd in much
the same way that some particles don't
interact with the Higgs field the
particles that don't interact like
photons for example are called massless
now suppose that Peter Higgs entered the
same room perhaps in search of a pint in
this case the physicist will immediately
crowd around Higgs to discuss with him
their efforts to measure the properties
of his namesake boson because he
interacts strongly with a crowd Higgs
will move slowly across the room
continue our analogy Higgs has become a
massive particle through his
interactions with the field so if that's
the Higgs field how does the Higgs boson
fit into all of this let's pretend our
crowd of partygoers is uniformly spread
across the room now suppose someone pops
their head in the door to report a rumor
of a discovery at some distant rival
laboratory people near the door will
hear the rumor but people far away won't
so they'll move closer to the door to
ask this will create a clump in the
crowd as people have heard the rumor
they will return to their original
positions to discuss its implications
but people further away will then ask
what's going on the result will be a
clump in the crowd that moves across the
room this clump is analogous to the
Higgs boson it is important to
member that is not that massive
particles interact more with the higgs
field and our analogy of the party all
particles are equal until they enter the
room both Peter Higgs and a tax
collector have zero mass it is the
interaction with the crowd that causes
them to gain mass I'll say that again
mass comes from interactions with the
field so let's recap a particle gets
more or less mass depending on how it
interacts with the field just like
different people will move through the
crowd at different speeds depending on
their popularity and the Higgs boson is
just a clump in the field like a rumor
crossing the room of course this analogy
is just that an analogy but it's the
best analogy anyone has come up with so
far so that's it that's what the Higgs
field and Higgs boson is all about
continuing research will tell us if we
found it and the reward will probably be
more than just a bottle of champagne
you